doc-improvement: applications: nrf_desktop: Document USB next support (#15854)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrf: applications/nrf_desktop/doc/usb_state.rst

Configuration
*************

The module is enabled by selecting the :ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_USB_ENABLE <config_desktop_app_options>` option.

The :ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_USB_ENABLE <config_desktop_app_options>` option is implied by the :ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_ROLE_HID_DONGLE <config_desktop_app_options>` option.
The module is enabled by default for the nRF Desktop dongles because the dongles forward the HID data to the host connected over USB.
See the :ref:`nrf_desktop_hid_configuration` documentation for details.

The module can be used with either the USB legacy stack or the USB next stack.

> The USB stack is selected by enabling one of the following Kconfig options:

Reviewer: "choice option" - to stress that you cannot select both?

* :ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_USB_STACK_LEGACY <config_desktop_app_options>`

>   The option enables USB legacy stack.

Reviewer: Maybe mention that it is default option?

* :ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_USB_STACK_NEXT <config_desktop_app_options>`
  The option enables USB next stack.

.. note::
  The USB next stack integration is ref:`experimental <software_maturity>`.
  The HID boot protocol integration is not yet fully tested and may not work properly.
  The secondary image slot background erase in :ref:`nrf_desktop_dfu` may cause missing USB HID subscriptions after a USB cable is attached.

Some of the properties are configured in the same way for both stacks, but part of the configuration is specific to the selected USB stack.

> See the following section for details.

Reviewer: section -> sections

Configuration
*************

The module is enabled by selecting the :ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_USB_ENABLE <config_desktop_app_options>` option.

The :ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_USB_ENABLE <config_desktop_app_options>` option is implied by the :ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_ROLE_HID_DONGLE <config_desktop_app_options>` option.
The module is enabled by default for the nRF Desktop dongles because the dongles forward the HID data to the host connected over USB.
See the :ref:`nrf_desktop_hid_configuration` documentation for details.

The module can be used with either the USB legacy stack or the USB next stack.
The USB stack is selected by enabling one of the following Kconfig choice options:

* :ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_USB_STACK_LEGACY <config_desktop_app_options>`
  The option enables USB legacy stack (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_USB_DEVICE_STACK`).
  The USB legacy stack is used by default.
* :ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_USB_STACK_NEXT <config_desktop_app_options>`
  The option enables USB next stack (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_USB_DEVICE_STACK_NEXT`).

.. note::

>   The USB next stack integration is ref:`experimental <software_maturity>`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  The USB next stack integration is :ref:`experimental <software_maturity>`.
```

*************

> The module is enabled by selecting :ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_USB_ENABLE <config_desktop_app_options>` option.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The module is enabled by selecting the :ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_USB_ENABLE <config_desktop_app_options>` option.
```

The :ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_USB_ENABLE <config_desktop_app_options>` option is implied by the :ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_ROLE_HID_DONGLE <config_desktop_app_options>` option.
The module is enabled by default for the nRF Desktop dongles because the dongles forward the HID data to the host connected over USB.
See the :ref:`nrf_desktop_hid_configuration` documentation for details.

The module can be used with either USB legacy stack or USB next stack.
The USB stack is selected by enabling one of the following Kconfig options:

* :ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_USB_STACK_LEGACY <config_desktop_app_options>`
  The option enables USB legacy stack.
* :ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_USB_STACK_NEXT <config_desktop_app_options>`
  The option enables USB next stack.

.. note::
  The USB next stack integration is ref:`experimental <software_maturity>`.
  The HID boot protocol integration is not yet fully tested and may not work properly.

>   The secondary image slot background erase in :ref:`nrf_desktop_dfu` may cause missing USB HID subscriptions after an USB cable is attached.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  The secondary image slot background erase in :ref:`nrf_desktop_dfu` may cause missing USB HID subscriptions after a USB cable is attached.
```

See the following section for details.

.. _nrf_desktop_usb_state_identifiers:

USB device identifiers
======================

USB device identifiers are defined in the same way for both USB stacks.
The module relies on common :ref:`nrf_desktop_hid_device_identifiers` defined for the nRF Desktop application.

For USB legacy stack, this results in updating defaults for the following Kconfig options:

* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_USB_DEVICE_MANUFACTURER` - Manufacturer's name.
* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_USB_DEVICE_PRODUCT` - Product name.
* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_USB_DEVICE_VID` - Vendor ID (VID) number.
* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_USB_DEVICE_PID` - Product ID (PID) number.

For USB next stack, the module uses dedicated APIs to set the USB device identifiers during initialization.

.. _nrf_desktop_usb_state_hid_class_instance:

USB HID class instance configuration
====================================

The nRF Desktop device can provide multiple instances of HID-class USB.
By default, the number of the HID-class USB instances should be set to:

* ``1`` for HID peripherals (:ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_ROLE_HID_PERIPHERAL <config_desktop_app_options>`).

>   More HID-class USB instances can be used if selective HID report subscription feature is enabled (:ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_USB_SELECTIVE_REPORT_SUBSCRIPTION <config_desktop_app_options>`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  You can use more HID-class USB instances if the selective HID report subscription feature is enabled (:ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_USB_SELECTIVE_REPORT_SUBSCRIPTION <config_desktop_app_options>`).
```

* :ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_HID_DONGLE_BOND_COUNT <config_desktop_app_options>` for HID dongles (:ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_ROLE_HID_DONGLE <config_desktop_app_options>`).

See the subsections below for details.

nRF Desktop peripheral
----------------------

The nRF Desktop peripheral devices by default use only a single HID-class USB instance.
In that case, this instance is used for all the HID reports.

> Enable :ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_USB_SELECTIVE_REPORT_SUBSCRIPTION <config_desktop_app_options>` to use more than one USB HID-class instance on nRF Desktop peripheral.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Enable :ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_USB_SELECTIVE_REPORT_SUBSCRIPTION <config_desktop_app_options>` to use more than one USB HID-class instance on the nRF Desktop peripheral.
```

In this example, the HID mouse input report is handled by the first HID-class USB instance and the HID keyboard input report is handled by the second HID-class USB instance.

nRF Desktop dongle
------------------

The nRF Desktop dongle device can use either a single HID-class USB instance or a number of instances equal to that specified in the :ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_HID_DONGLE_BOND_COUNT <config_desktop_app_options>` option.
If only one instance is used, reports from all peripherals connected to the dongle are forwarded to the same instance.
In other cases, reports from each of the bonded peripherals are forwarded to a dedicated HID-class USB instance.
The same instance is used after reconnection.

USB HID configuration in USB legacy stack
-----------------------------------------

For the USB legacy stack, the :ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_USB_STACK_LEGACY <config_desktop_app_options>` selects the required dependencies: :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_USB_DEVICE_STACK` and :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_USB_DEVICE_HID` Kconfig options.
The number of HID-class USB instances in the USB legacy stack is specified by :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_USB_HID_DEVICE_COUNT`.

> The default value of this option is updated to match requirements for either nRF Desktop peripheral or dongle.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The default value of this option is updated to match requirements for either an nRF Desktop peripheral or a dongle.
```

Low latency device configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> The module sets default value of :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_USB_HID_POLL_INTERVAL_MS` to ``1``.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The module sets default the value of :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_USB_HID_POLL_INTERVAL_MS` to ``1``.
```

For low latency of HID reports, the device requests a polling rate of 1 ms.

Boot protocol configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The :ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_HID_BOOT_INTERFACE_MOUSE <config_desktop_app_options>` and :ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_HID_BOOT_INTERFACE_KEYBOARD <config_desktop_app_options>` Kconfig options are used to control support of HID boot reports in the nRF Desktop application.
The module aligns the USB HID boot protocol configuration with the application configuration.
The module sets the default value of the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_USB_HID_BOOT_PROTOCOL` Kconfig option and calls the :c:func:`usb_hid_set_proto_code` function during initialization to set the USB HID boot interface protocol code.
Common HID boot protocol code is used for all of the HID-class USB instances.

USB HID configuration in USB next stack
---------------------------------------

For the USB next stack, the :ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_USB_STACK_NEXT <config_desktop_app_options>` selects the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_USB_DEVICE_STACK_NEXT` Kconfig option.
Every USB HID-class instance is configured through a separate DTS node compatible with ``zephyr,hid-device``.

> The DTS node configures, among others, used HID boot protocol, size of the longest HID input report and HID polling rate.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The DTS node configures, among others, used the HID boot protocol, the size of the longest HID input report, and the HID polling rate.
```

> Make sure to update DTS configuration to match requirements of your application.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Make sure to update the DTS configuration to match requirements of your application.
```

nRF Desktop application defines the USB HID-class instances used by the USB next stack for all of the supported boards and file suffixes.
See the existing configurations for reference.

Defining USB HID-class instances in the DTS, by default, enables the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_USBD_HID_SUPPORT` Kconfig option.

USB wakeup configuration
========================

The nRF Desktop device can work as a source of wakeup events for the host device if connected through the USB.
To use the feature, enable the :ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_USB_REMOTE_WAKEUP <config_desktop_app_options>` option.

> This option selects the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_USB_DEVICE_REMOTE_WAKEUP` Kconfig option to enable required dependencies if USB legacy stack is used.

Reviewer: Shouldn't we mention what happens in next-stack here?

Author: No additional configuration is applied there

Reviewer: But just reading this doc I have no idea is wakeup events working for next-stack. I would clearly state it here.

Author: Ok, added one more sentence. Hope it helps

Reviewer: I meant to add sentence that states that wakeup events are working on next-stack:
If the USB next stack is used, no additional Kconfig dependencies need to be selected. -> 
If the USB next stack is used,  wakeup events are enabled by default and do not need any option to turn them on.

Author: Discussed offline. Rephrased a bit.

Every USB HID-class instance is configured through a separate DTS node compatible with ``zephyr,hid-device``.
The DTS node configures, among others, the used HID boot protocol, the size of the longest HID input report, and the HID polling rate.
Make sure to update the DTS configuration to match requirements of your application.
nRF Desktop application defines the USB HID-class instances used by the USB next stack for all of the supported boards and file suffixes.
See the existing configurations for reference.

Defining USB HID-class instances in the DTS, by default, enables the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_USBD_HID_SUPPORT` Kconfig option.

USB wakeup configuration
========================

The nRF Desktop device can work as a source of wakeup events for the host device if connected through the USB.
To use the feature, enable the :ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_USB_REMOTE_WAKEUP <config_desktop_app_options>` option.
This option selects the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_USB_DEVICE_REMOTE_WAKEUP` Kconfig option to enable required dependencies if USB legacy stack is used.

> The USB next stack supports remote wakeup by default, and you need not select any additional Kconfig dependencies.

Reviewer 4: `don't need to select`?

Author: I think we use `need not select` in similar places. @divipillai could you confirm, please?

Author: Discussed offline and aligned

* :c:enum:`USB_STATE_ACTIVE` - The device is ready to exchange data with the host.
* :c:enum:`USB_STATE_SUSPENDED` - The host has requested the device to enter the suspended state.

These states are broadcasted by the |usb_state| with a :c:struct:`usb_state_event`.
When the device is connected to the host and configured for the communication, the module will broadcast the :c:enum:`USB_STATE_ACTIVE` state.

HID data handling
=================

The module handles USB HID input report subscriptions.

> For the USB legacy stack, all of the USB HID-class instances subscribe to all supported HID reports for the selected protocol when USB stack reports :c:enum:`USB_DC_CONFIGURED` and :c:enum:`USB_STATE_ACTIVE` state is broadcasted.

Author: Please double check if it shouldn't be `is` here. `:c:enum:`USB_STATE_ACTIVE` state is broadcasted` (just one thing). The `USB_DC_CONFIGURED` is reported by the USB stack.

> For the USB legacy stack, all of the USB HID-class instances subscribe to all supported HID reports for the selected protocol when USB stack reports :c:enum:`USB_DC_CONFIGURED` and :c:enum:`USB_STATE_ACTIVE` state is broadcasted.

Reviewer 2: yeah agree with Anna here.
